## Vanderbilt University
## Leadership, Policy and Organizations
## Class Number 9952
## Spring 2021


Due: March 2, midnight

For this assignment I would like you to complete a brief (no more than
2000 word) combined problem statement and literature review.

The problem statement section of this assignment should include a very
brief statement of the problem to be studied, along with a statement of
your research question. The research question, as described last
semester, should make clear the population under study, your unit of
analysis, and the dependent and independent variables. The problem
statement and research question shouldn’t take more than a page. You can
use your previous research question, revise it, or choose a new one. The
only limitation is that you must have a research question that can be
answered using an available dataset.

The review should be more narrowly tailored than the kind of review you
would compile for an article that has a major theoretical component, or
a larger work such as your dissertation. Instead of covering the entire
intellectual landscape in your chosen research area, your literature
review should instead focus on one question: *What has been done to
answer this research question, and how will your work add to the body of
knowledge in this area?*

The focus of your lit review should therefore be your specific
contribution to the established literature. The following list describes
some (but not nearly all) of the ways in which your work can make a
contribution:

-   Applying a previously investigated research question to a new
    dataset

-   Creating a new and improved analysis of a previously investigated
    research question (more appropriate model, better
    specification, etc.)

-   Answering a previously unanswered research question.

-   Resolving apparently conflicting evidence through improved analysis
    or a new dataset

-   Improving the evidentiary basis for a given hypothesis.

The literature you review should be very narrowly tailored—you are
primarily interested in works that have covered the same ground that you
are covering. The emphasis should be on empirical work, with an eye
toward both *describing* and *critiquing* what has been done before.
While the number of works to be described will vary depending on how
extensive the research is in your area, you should conscientiously
attempt to narrow down the focus of your review to those that are
closest to the work you are attempting.

The *description* of relevant empirical work should include the question
taken up by the authors, the data used, the method employed for
analysis, and the results. Be quite specific about the results,
including the size of the estimated impact of the independent variable
or variables on the dependent variable. The *critique* of the work
should say in what ways the research fails to achieve the objectives the
authors set for the work. The critique of each article should point
toward your own contribution—what others have failed to do, you will do
in your article.

For this work and future work for this course, please conform to the
stylistic guidelines provided by APA in the 6th edition of their
handbook.
